Adding minimal docs around using index mode logs. (#110932)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/data-streams/logs.asciidoc

[[logsds]]
== Logs data stream (LogsDS)

> You can use a LogsDS to store metrics data more efficiently. In our benchmarks,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use a LogsDS to store log data more efficiently. In our benchmarks,
```

> metrics data stored in a LogsDS used ~2.5 times less disk space than a regular data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
log data stored in a LogsDS used ~2.5 times less disk space than a regular data
```

stream. The exact impact will vary per data set. The main benefit from using LogsDS is reduced storage.

The following features are enabled in a logs data stream:
* <<synthetic-source,Synthetic source>>, which omits storing the _source. When _source or part of it is requested it is synthesized on the fly at runtime.

> * Indexing sorting. By default indices are sorting by `host.name` and `@timestamp` fields at index time, which can be overwritten.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Index sorting. By default indices are sorted by `host.name` and `@timestamp` fields at index time, which can be overwritten.
```

> * Enable more space efficient compressions for fields with doc values enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Enable more space efficient compression for fields with doc values enabled.
```

[discrete]
[[how-to-use-tsds]]
=== How to use a LogsDS

Enabling LogsDS only requires configuring the `index.mode` setting to `logs`. For example like this is done in this template:

[source,console]
----
PUT _index_template/my-index-template
{
  "index_patterns": ["logs-*"],
  "data_stream": { },
  "template": {
     "settings": {
        "index.mode": "logs" <1>
     }
  }
  "priority": 500 <2>
}
----

<1> The index mode setting

> <2> Defining a priority to potentially avoid that other index templates match with overlapping index patterns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> Defining a priority to avoid other index templates with overlapping index patterns potentially overriding the settings.
```

[[logsds]]
== Logs data stream

You can use a logs data stream to store log data more efficiently. In our benchmarks,
log data stored in a logs data stream used ~2.5 times less disk space than a regular data
stream. The exact impact will vary per data set. The main benefit from using a logs data stream is reduced storage.

The following features are enabled in a logs data stream:

* <<synthetic-source,Synthetic source>>, which omits storing the _source. When _source or part of it is requested it is synthesized on the fly at runtime.

* Index sorting. By default indices are sorted by `host.name` and `@timestamp` fields at index time, which can be overwritten.

> * Enable more space efficient compression for fields with doc values enabled.

Reviewer 2: we already say the feature is enabled in the intro to the list

i'm also interested in the "why" behind this - what makes us able to more efficiently compress these fields in this context? 

```suggestion
* More space efficient compression for fields with <<doc-values,`doc_values`>> enabled.
```

[discrete]
[[how-to-use-logsds]]

> === How to use a logs data stream

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Create a logs data stream
```

> Enabling a logs data stream only requires configuring the `index.mode` setting to `logs`. For example like this is done in this template:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To create a logs data stream, set your index template  `index.mode` to `logs`:
```

[source,console]
----
PUT _index_template/my-index-template
{
  "index_patterns": ["logs-*"],
  "data_stream": { },
  "template": {
     "settings": {
        "index.mode": "logs" <1>
     }
  },
  "priority": 500 <2>
}
----
// TEST

> <1> The index mode setting

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<1> The index mode setting.
```

> <2> Defining a priority to avoid other index templates with overlapping index patterns potentially overriding the settings.

Reviewer 2: I'd suggest omitting this annotation because it's generic to all index templates

Author: By default ES does ship with a builtin template for logs-* with a priority of 100. If no priority is defined or below 100, then this template doesn't get picked up. Let me add this to the annotation explanation.

> After this data can be indexed like in any other data stream.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the index template is created, you can start indexing data and <<use-a-data-stream,using the data stream>>.
```

[[logs-data-stream]]
== Logs data stream

preview::[Logs data streams and the logs index mode are in tech preview and may be changed or removed in the future. Don't use logs data streams or logs index mode in production.]

A logs data stream is a data stream type that stores log data more efficiently.

In benchmarks, log data stored in a logs data stream used ~2.5 times less disk space than a regular data
stream. The exact impact will vary depending on your data set.

The following features are enabled in a logs data stream:

* <<synthetic-source,Synthetic source>>, which omits storing the `_source` field. When the document source is requested, it is synthesized from document fields upon retrieval.

> * Index sorting. This yields a lower storage footprint. By default indices are sorted by `host.name` and `@timestamp` fields at index time, which can be overwritten.

Reviewer 2: the "which can be overwritten" clause is a little confusing here - what can be overwritten? 

I saw a presentation a while ago that explained why index sorting used less data on disk. could we explain that here? what is the tradeoff?

Reviewer 3: I think he means "overridden" as in you can override those settings with fields of your choosing. @martijnvg @salvatore-campagna can you address that in a separate PR?

* More space efficient compression for fields with <<doc-values,`doc_values`>> enabled.

> The new logs data stream should be used for all data streams that store logs, because of the storage benefits that comes with it.

Reviewer 2: since we're telling people not to use this in prod above, I'd probably exclude this for now. 

was hoping to see a dedicated "when to use" section like [this one](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/tsds.html#when-to-use-tsds), that also maybe pointed out shortcomings or gotchas

Author: I think we should then address this in a follow up. I will remove it for now.

[discrete]
[[how-to-use-logsds]]
=== Create a logs data stream

To create a logs data stream, set your index template  `index.mode` to `logs`:

[source,console]
----
PUT _index_template/my-index-template
{
  "index_patterns": ["logs-*"],
  "data_stream": { },
  "template": {
     "settings": {
        "index.mode": "logs" <1>
     }
  },
  "priority": 101 <2>
}
----
// TEST

<1> The index mode setting.

> <2> Defining a priority to avoid other index templates with overlapping index patterns potentially overriding the settings. Elasticserch by default ships with an index template with a `logs-*` pattern with a priority of 100. Defining a priority higher than 100 ensures that this index template gets selected over the default index template for `logs-*` pattern.

Reviewer 4: I think the pattern is `logs-*-*`. Maybe also link this page https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/index-templates.html
There is a section "Avoid index pattern collisions"

> <2> Defining a priority to avoid other index templates with overlapping index patterns potentially overriding the settings. Elasticserch by default ships with an index template with a `logs-*-*` pattern with a priority of 100. Defining a priority higher than 100 ensures that this index template gets selected over the default index template for `logs-*-*` pattern. See the <<avoid-index-pattern-collisions,avoid index pattern collision section>> for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<2> The index template priority. By default, Elasticsearch ships with an index template with a `logs-*-*` pattern with a priority of 100. You need to define a priority higher than 100 to ensure that this index template gets selected over the default index template for the `logs-*-*` pattern. See the <<avoid-index-pattern-collisions,avoid index pattern collision section>> for more information.
```

After the index template is created, you can start indexing data and <<use-a-data-stream,using the data stream>>.

> 

Reviewer 4: Maybe we should say that for existing data streams a rollover is required?

Author: We can add another section to this page about migrating existing data stream containing logs to logs data stream, but let's do that in a follow up change?
The template needs to be updated and then a rollover needs to happen.

> After the index template is created, you can start indexing data and <<use-a-data-stream,using the data stream>>.

Reviewer 2: consider this small tweak so it's accurate until you follow up with migrating existing data streams

```suggestion
After the index template is created, new indices that use the template will be configured as a logs data stream. You can start indexing data and <<use-a-data-stream,using the data stream>>.
```
